New Post for How to Fail Gracefully (#22)
merit-network/merit-network.github.io: content/blog/how-to-fail-gracefully/index.md

---
date: "2021-01-05T15:00:00Z"
description: "Empower your end-users to know the difference between a broken app and a data entry issue."
featuredImage: visuals-JpTY4gUviJM-unsplash.jpg
featuredImageCredit: "visuals"
featuredImageLink: "https://unsplash.com/photos/JpTY4gUviJM"
tags: []
title: How to Fail Gracefully
---

_**Fail Gracefully!** Empower your users by providing them with applications that fail gracefully, or indicate clean error messaging without stopping them from getting the job done._

# TL;DR

If fail you must, then provide an accurate error message on the User Interface to guide users to resolve the issues.

# What the heck does it mean?

> "We are unable to perform this operation. We are sorry for the inconvenience, please check back later.'' When throwing your computer out the window isn't an option, what else can you do? Nothing.

Author: ```suggestion
"We are unable to perform this operation. We are sorry for the inconvenience, please check back later.'' When throwing your computer out the window is not an option, what else can you do? Nothing.
```

Most of the time we move on, just work through the thing, and try it a different way. Maybe an incognito window, maybe clear our cache, maybe restarting our computer? Not everybody has an automated way to debug an issue. If they did, then software companies everywhere would cease to exist.

# Support the User

As Tech Support (yes, we are support, we create, we manage, we develop, we guide, but we support), we need to put ourselves back into the shoes of the User. We cannot always assume that the User is doing it wrong, because we build the applications for the User. The error checking in the code knows enough to display an error. At the very least, if the User is 'doing it wrong', then the error that we throw out should be smart enough to tell the User what happened. It is okay to be transparent- it fixes issues quicker, and builds trust with the user.

> What if throwing a catch-all error and saying 'open a ticket with support', we take the time to **at least** show the user what **could** be wrong. 

Reviewer: I think a couple words are missing, maybe something like:
```suggestion
What if instead of throwing a catch-all error and saying 'open a ticket with support', we take the time to **at least** show the user what **could** be wrong. 
```

**Examples:**
* "Please enter value(s) for: Rejection Reason."
* "There appears to be duplicated information for this Contact."
* "Your totals do not balance, please review."

# Let the User Decide

> Instead of blocking the User from doing any work at all consider warning the User, and then logging the issue in an audit trail. Allow the User to save, because it might something that will not negatively impact a background process that is running, or harm a future record that has not even been created yet. Do not assume that the User shoul not do a specific thing just because they do not know that they need it (yet).

Reviewer: Just a few minor edits:
```suggestion
Instead of blocking the User from doing any work at all, consider warning the User and then logging the issue in an audit trail. Allow the User to save, because it might be something that will not negatively impact a background process that is running, or harm a future record that has not even been created yet. Do not assume that the User should not do a specific thing just because they do not know that they need it (yet).
```
